## 3.4 Data manipulation commands
These commands change or show the data inside the database. Examples include `SELECT`, `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, `DELETE`.

### 3.4.0 SELECT
Displays data inside a table. We began to use `SELECT` queries way back in Unit 2, and `SELECT` is the most common command we see in the RDBMS.

### 3.4.1 INSERT
Adds a new record (row) into a table. There are two formats for the ```INSERT``` command in MySQL:

#### INSERT Version 1 - Extended
Includes an explicit list of columns, as well as the values. Example:
```sql
INSERT INTO mytable(first, last)  -- here is the list of columns
VALUES ('Mary', 'Smith');         -- here are the values
```
The **advantage** to this extended format is that it is complete and leaves very little room for mistakes. The **disadvantage** is that it is slightly longer to write and will require more bytes to store as a file or send across the network than the alternative (below).

#### INSERT Version 2 - Short
Without a column list. Example:
```sql
INSERT INTO mytable 
VALUES ('Mary','Smith');
```
The **advantage** to this format is that the statement is shorter. The **disadvantage** is that you must enter data for ALL columns, and you must have them in the correct order. 

#### Extended, Multiple INSERTs 
You can do multiple INSERT statements at one time, as follows:
```sql
INSERT INTO mytable (first, middle, last) 
VALUES('Mary','W','Smith'),
      ('Richard','Q','Williams'),
      ('Tran','L','Phan');
```

### 3.4.2 INSERT - SELECT
You can use the return values from a `SELECT` command to populate a new table. Here is an example where we want to create a new table of just the non-deceased pets:

```sql
INSERT into new_pets (petID, petName, petBirthDate) 
  SELECT id, name, bd 
  FROM old_pets
  WHERE deceased ='false';
```
Sometimes we need to `SELECT` from one schema (database) and `INSERT` into a table in another schema (database). We can prefix the *other* table with the correct schema name. For example, suppose we have data in a schema called *test* that we want to move into a new schema called *production*:
```sql
INSERT into production.mytable (foo, bar)
  SELECT foo, bar
  FROM test.anothertable
  WHERE status = "ready";
```
### 3.4.3 UPDATE 
The `UPDATE` command changes the data in an existing row for some particular column(s). Example: Oh no, the student is listed as "Maria" but her name is really "Mary":
```sql
UPDATE mytable 
SET first_name = 'Mary'
WHERE student_id = 90897;
```
With `UPDATE`, make sure you use a `WHERE` clause to ensure that you have the correct row. The `WHERE` clause will usually reference the Primary Key of the table, which is the unique identifier. By using the Primary Key in the `UPDATE` we ensure that we are changing the correct row!

What would have happened if we had done this query:
```sql
UPDATE mytable 
SET first_name = 'Mary'
WHERE first_name = 'Maria';
```
Answer: we would have changed EVERY 'Maria' in the whole table to be named 'Mary'. Oops.

Sometimes we want to do that, for example if we wanted to change all F grades to a D:
```sql
UPDATE basket_weaving_grades 
SET student_grade = 'D'
WHERE student_grade = 'F';
```
Usually we like to have a `WHERE` clause in an `UPDATE` statement. If we have no `WHERE` clause, then the `UPDATE` statement is applied to ALL rows. That might be what you want, but on the other hand, it might not! Be careful.

Here we update both the grade and the last_name for one particular student:
```sql
UPDATE basket_weaving_students
SET grade='A', last_name='Smith'
WHERE studentID = 99; -- here we use the Primary Key to ensure that we have the correct student
```
### 3.4.4 DELETE
Removes a row. 

Example: Let's remove *all* students who got a D or F in Basket-Weaving:
```sql
DELETE FROM basket_weaving_grades
WHERE student_grade in ('D', 'F');
```
Another format:
```sql
DELETE FROM basket_weaving_grades
WHERE student_grade = 'D'
OR student_grade = 'F';
```

What if you don't want to remove an entire row, just one or two cell values? Then you don't want `DELETE`, you want `UPDATE`.

```sql
UPDATE basket_weaving_grades
SET student_grade=''  -- sets a blank grade value wherever there was a D or F
WHERE student_grade IN ('D','F');
```
