## 3.5 Data Definition Commands
These commands define how the data is stored. Examples include `CREATE`, `DROP`, `ALTER`, `RENAME`.

### 3.5.0 CREATE 
Makes a new table or database. If you are creating a table, at the point you run the `CREATE`, you will define all the columns (fields) your table will have. If you are creating an entire database, you will name the database during the `CREATE`, and then you will `CREATE` each table underneath that.

If you want to see the `CREATE` statements for a table or set of tables *after* they've already been made, you can use the "Export" tab, choose "Custom", then select "View output as text" and "Structure", then press "Go".

### 3.5.1 DROP 
Removes a table or database

Example:
```sql
DROP TABLE pets;
```
### 3.5.2 ALTER
Change the structure of an existing table. This is most easily done through a point-and-click interface, such as PhpMyAdmin (the "Structure" tab has several "Edit" buttons), but it is helpful to know what commands are being run underneath the interface also.

After you edit a table in the point-and-click interface, it will show you the `ALTER` command that was run for you.

### 3.5.3 RENAME
Change the name of an existing table. This is also frequently done through the point-and-click interface (Go to the "operations" tab for the table.)

### 3.5.4 TRUNCATE
Remove all data from the table but leave it intact. The difference between doing a `TRUNCATE` and a `DELETE` is primarily speed. `TRUNCATE` is much faster but it does not do as many checks (we'll learn more about integrity checks later).
