## 1.4. Basic SQL Commands
### 1.4.1 Commands that change database or table structure
#### 1.4.1.1 CREATE
Makes a new table or database. For tables, at the point of `CREATE` you will define all the columns (fields) your table will have. For databases, you will only name the database during the ```CREATE```.
#### 1.4.1.2 DROP
Removes a table or database, as well as all the data inside it.
#### 1.4.1.3 ALTER
Change the structure of an existing table. 

Examples: 
* change the name of a column
* remove a column
* change the length of a column, for example last_name needs to be 50 characters instead of 20 characters
* add a new column to an existing table

### 1.4.2 Commands that work with data
#### 1.4.2.1 SELECT
Displays data inside one or more tables.
#### 1.4.2.2 INSERT
Adds a new record (row) into a table. 

Example:
* We have a list of 30 students, and we just got a new student in the class, so we want to `INSERT` a new row for this student
#### 1.4.2.3 UPDATE
Changes the data in an existing row

Example:
* We entered the wrong birthdate for a student, so we need to change that in that student's row
* We left out the middle name for a student, so we want to add that piece of data to that student's row

#### 1.4.2.4 DELETE
Removes a row. 

Example: 
* A student dropped the class so we want to remove them from the table of students in this class

Question:
* What if you don't want to remove an entire row, but you just want to remove one or two cell values? Then you don't want `DELETE`, you want `UPDATE`! `UPDATE` will retain the row, but allow you to remove (or change) individual values. 

#### 1.4.2.5 TRUNCATE
Remove all the rows from a table but leaves the table structure intact.

Example:
* We have a table of students in a class, but the semester is over. We want to empty out this particular group of students, but leave the columns ready for the next batch of students in the following semester.
